Science and software testing

Software testing, particularly manual software testing, is sometimes thought of as nothing more than following a script to confirm that the software under test does what it was designed to do. Writing the script might involve turning set of requirements into a set of test instructions. From that perspective, testing might seem like a boring and relatively mindless task. And to be honest, that is the traditional view created by testing as part of the Waterfall method of software development in large organisations. The division of labour meant that there were some people who did nothing but follow scripts someone else had written, and report bugs that someone else would investigate.

Science, on the other hand, is undeniably interesting and challenging. So it might be suprising to know that I find both engaging and worth spending my time and effort on<sup id="fnr1"><a href="#fn1">1</a></sup>. Having worked as a software tester, and having studied a scientific field (cognitive science), I've noticed some similarities that help explain why I'm drawn to both persuits despite their apparent lack of similarity.

[Science can be defined as](https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/science):

> "The intellectual and practical activity encompassing the systematic study of the structure and behaviour of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment."

That doesn't seem to describe following testing scripts at all. Even if you swap "the physical and natural world" for "the software under test", and even if you include the task of writing scripts. But if you consider the entire process of software testing you'll see similarities emerge. For one thing, test scripts have to be written based on something, and in today's world of agile software development, than something tends *not* to be requirements handed down from designers, but rather requirements explored, developed, and refined iteratively. Observation and experiment are a big part of that iterative process. This is especially the case when working on existing software that doesn't have good documentation.

The reality of testing is a lot more than the notion of following a script. A more complete [definition of testing](http://www.satisfice.com/blog/archives/856) is that:

> "Testing is the process of evaluating a product by learning about it through exploration and experimentation, which includes to some degree: questioning, study, modeling, observation, inference, etc." 

When defined that way, it's much clearer how testing and science are similar. Questioning, study, modeling, observation, and inference are all core aspects of science and testing.

Another similarity between science and software testing is that neither truly have an end. There is always more to discover through science, and, at least in practice if not in theory, there is always more to learn about any but the simplest software. So in both cases it's not productive to think of the entire process as having a goal, but it is necessary to define a reasonable milestone as the completion of a project. We don't finish testing when there are no bugs, but we can consider testing complete when it behaves well under a reasonable range of scenarios.

Science can be thought of as trying to better understand the world, rather than trying to prove a particular claim. The scientific method involves a process of making hypotheses, and then gathering evidence and analysing data to draw conclusions about whether the hypothesis is supported. It's possible to find evidence that rules out a hypothesis, but it's not possible find evidence that a particular hypothesis is *the* explanation for the data. This is because other hypotheses might explain that evidence just as well, including hypotheses that no-one has come up with yet. But after carefully analysing the results of several experiments a clearer understanding can begin to emerge (in the form of a theory). In that way you can think of science as showing what doesn't work until there's a reasonably solid explanation left. It's not about being right, but about being less wrong. Similarly, testing is not about proving that the software is bug free, but about providing evidence that using the software in different ways doesn't releveal any issues, until what's left is reasonably solid.
 
<p style="font-size:12px" id="fn1"><a href="#fnr1">1.</a> Not so much manual testing specifically, but a comprehensive approach to testing that includes exploratory testing and automation.