---
layout: single
title:  "foo"
share: false
---
Recently, [Rach Smith raised some important points about how we tend to talk about impostor syndrome](https://rachsmith.com/2017/i-dont-have-imposter-syndrome)

> * it minimizes the impact that this experience has on people that really do suffer from it.
> * we’re labelling what should be considered positive personality traits - humility, an acceptance that we can’t be right all the time, a desire to know more, as a “syndrome” that we need to “deal with”, “get over” or “get past”.

If you haven't read her post yet I highly recommend you do. The issue came up again during [Rach's chat with Dave on Developer on Fire](http://developeronfire.com/podcast/episode-288-rachel-smith-connecting-and-delivering). And that reminded me of [a post from Scott Hanselman from many years ago](https://www.hanselman.com/blog/ImAPhonyAreYou.aspx). 

> We all feel like phonies sometimes. We are all phonies. That's how we grow. We get into situations that are just a little more than we can handle, or we get in a little over our heads. Then we <strong>can</strong> handle them, and we <strong>aren't</strong> phonies, and we move on to the next challenge.<sup id="fnr1phony"><a href="#fn1phony">1</a></sup>

I can't truly say I've experienced impostor syndrome, although I suspect that's mostly because I've often been in small teams where everyone was similarly skilled. For example, I was one of two novice web developers in a product development team. We *really* didn't know what we were doing. I did feel unqualified, but since there was no-one more experienced to compare myself against I didn't feel like an impostor. But I *did* suffer from low self-confidence and a huge pile of self-doubt. Fortunately, experience and education has helped me come to grips with the limits of my knowledge and ability; paradoxically, leading to much better performance.

It all got me thinking about how jobs are advertised and how interviews are conducted, about the pressure to elevate one's 'hard' skills, about the growing awareness of the importance of 'soft' skills, and about the rock star culture that's promoted in some parts of the industry.

Rach and Scott noted the self-doubt and awareness of the gaps in their knowledge that even highly successful senior developers sometimes experience. This is something that is all too often missing from discussions about preparing for interviews, especially for highly sought-after positions. We're always told to prepare extensively (good advice), and to project confidence (sure, projecting a *lack* of confidence is understandably unhelpful), but the highest quality advice also points out the importance of awareness of the limits of one's skills and knowledge. Much of the advice I remember from my early days suggested I should do my best to cover up my weaknesses, which could only lead to feelings of insecurity and inevitably falling apart when the limits of my knowledge were revealed. Later, I received much better advice; to be able to say "I don't know," and then to work through the problem aloud, asking questions to fill in the gaps until I *do* have enough understanding to give a reasonable answer. And isn't that more or less how we work each day? If anyone actually had the supreme skills and confidence we're naively advised to portray during interviews, I'm pretty sure they wouldn't find the job challenging or interesting enough (in addition to potentially being arrogant assholes).

Another topic missing from good career advice, fortunately less common these days, is the importance of "soft" skills (i.e., personal and interpersonal skills). As Rach noted, "the most accomplished developers [have] constant awareness of the 'gap' in their knowledge and willingness to work towards closing it." That sort of awareness is as important a soft skill as general social and communication skills<sup id="fnr2comm"><a href="#fn2comm">2</a></sup>. The people I've experienced most joy in working with are those who freely admit their limitations and strive daily towards eliminating them. That effort shows in their contributions at work that go above and beyond the explicit requirements of their role. Among the worst people to work with are those who do the minimum work required, without any awareness of the opportunities for improvement that pass them by every day. Even worse are those who perform at a similar level while believing that they are in fact contributing much more and at a much greater degree of competence<sup id="fnr3dke"><a href="#fn3dke">3</a></sup>. The latter type of person is unlikely to experience anything that might be called "impostor syndrome", although if anyone were truly an impostor, it would be them.

Despite a growing understanding of the importance of soft skills, the realities of the job market reflect overwhelmingly the prioritisation of immediate technical skills. I'm confident that's a big part of the reason "rock star" developers are those seen as *having* the greatest skills rather than being most *able* to learn. The former doesn't imply the latter, especially if those great skills lie in one highly specific domain; you can learn to do one thing really well without being able to generalise that skill nor possess other distinct but important skills. The other downsides of specialisation are a topic for another post.

Similarly, the poor attitudes and bad behaviours of some workers are accepted because of their technical skills, despite the negative impact they have on the people around them. I think this might provide a subtle influence on feeling like an imposter; we provide a perverse incentive for people to behave in ways that no reasonable person wants to. We encourage people to promote themselves as the best coder, the most knowledgeable developer, the ideal job candidate, and we (at least implicitly) discourage people from embracing their range of skills and their ability to improve.

-----
<p style="font-size:12px" id="fn1phony"><a href="#fnr1phony">1</a>. I think Scott's framing of being a 'phony' embodies the problems Rach was referring to regarding mislabelling positive personality traits, though to be fair to Scott, it's also clear he's not trying to minimise the experience of those who do suffer from the feelings described.
<p style="font-size:12px" id="fn2comm"><a href="#fnr2comm">2</a>. Communication skills are apparently the #1 requirement in computing-related job ads (e.g., https://www.ziprecruiter.com/blog/job-skills-employers-want/). Other 'soft' skills are far less frequently mentioned.
<p style="font-size:12px" id="fn3dke"><a href="#fnr3dke">3</a>. <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dunning%E2%80%93Kruger_effect">The Dunning-Kruger effect</a> in effect, so to speak.